# GDMA-Subtype-Transcriptomics

Statement of compliance. Protocols utilizing human tissue were approved by the Baylor College of Medicine Institutional Review Board (H-28623). Participants were screened for inclusion and exclusion criteria by extensive medial record review, and informed consent was obtained before de-identification and utilization in the current study. Inclusion and exclusion criteria were set a priori as follows: For participants to be eligible, they must have been pregnant, at least 18 years of age, and able to provide informed consent to provide a placental sample at delivery. Parental permission was required for eligible subjects under the age of 18. Participants would be excluded if they were less than 13 years of age, unable to provide signed and dated informed consent, or unwilling to provide biological samples. In this study, all participants were over 18 years of age and relevant clinical metadata are reported in Table 1, A and Supplementary Table 1, A. Extensive clinical metadata was collected from the electronic medical record and curated in a secured database by trained research personnel. Selected cases were routinely audited and adjudicated by a board-certified or board-eligible maternal-fetal medicine specialist (KMA) and/or fellow (DR and/or KA) to ensure diagnostic accuracy. Diagnosis of gestational diabetes was based on uniform established institutional criteria using the Carpenter-Coustan glucose tolerance test (GTT), with a screening glucose challenge test (GCT) value of greater than or equal to 140 mg/dl defining a positive screen. Pre-gestational diabetes was classified by one or more of the following: established diagnosis of diabetes prior to pregnancy, positive GTT, or elevated hemoglobin A1c early in pregnancy (HbA1c>6.4). Hypertensive disorders of pregnancy, including both gestational hypertension and preeclampsia, were defined using the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists’ classification.27
Sample collection and processing. All samples were collected by personnel trained in perinatal and placental pathology under strict uniform protocol. Briefly, following standard obstetrical practice the placenta was delivered and immediately passed to trained personnel in a sterile clean container. In a separate room, two samples were collected from midway between the cord insertion and placental margin by incision through the fetal surface into the parenchyma, but not to the maternal surface. All samples were collected within one hour of delivery under clean and sterile conditions as detailed above, placed on dry ice in sterile closed vials, transported to the laboratory, and stored at −80°C until mRNA extraction. Bulk RNA-sequencing. RNA was extracted from placental tissue as previously described.28 The Machery Nagel Nucleospin II kit was used to extract RNA from each sample and samples were stored at -80°C. Each sample was analyzed for quality control on the Agilent Bioanalyzer, with a minimum RNA Integrity Number (RIN) of 4.0 accepted for transcriptomic analysis. For each library, mRNA was purified from 10µg of total RNA using the DynaBeads mRNA Purification Kit (Invitrogen) and fragmented using the RNA Fragmentation Reagents (Ambion). Double-stranded cDNA was synthesized from fragmented mRNA using the Superscript Double-Stranded cDNA Synthesis Kit (Invitrogen) and Random Hexamer primers (50ng/ul, Invitrogen). cDNA libraries were prepared according to the manufacturer’s protocol (TruSeq RNA Library Prep Kit v2) and sequenced on an Illumina Hiseq 2000. Bulk RNA-seq analysis. Reads were pre-processed, and quality filtered using FastqQC (v0.11.9) and barcodes and adapters were trimmed using Trimmomatic (v0.33)29. Reads were aligned to the human transcriptome (GRCh38.p13) using STAR (v2.7.8)30. PCR duplicate reads were removed using Picard (v2.24.0)31. Unique reads were counted using HTseq (v0.11.1)32. Counts were used for differential expression analysis in R (v4.0.2) using DEseq2 (v3.12)33 relative to the healthy control placenta samples. GO Biological Processes functional enrichment analysis was done utilizing clusterProfiler (v4)34 to identify significantly enriched terms.

GEO Contents: The bulk RNA-seq data have been deposited to the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO accession GSE249311). Also included-> count_matrix.tsv, a pre-processed htseq raw counts matrix used as input for DESeq2 analysis
